# Spain_load_shortfall_prediction

# Description

The supply of electricity plays a large role in the livelihood of citizens in a country. Electricity, amongst other things, helps us stay connected, keep warm, and feed our families. Therefore there's a need to keep the lights on in order to maintain and improve the standard of living by investing in electricity infrastructure. However, in recent years, there has been evidence that the use of purely non-renewable sources is not sustainable.

The government of Spain was considering an expansion of its renewable energy resource infrastructure investments. As such, they required information on the trends and patterns of the country's renewable sources and fossil fuel energy generation. For this very reason, the government of Spain had been tracking the different energy sources available within the country.

In this project, working as a team of five, we were tasked to model the shortfall between the energy generated by means of fossil fuels and various renewable sources  for the country of Spain. The daily shortfall, which has been referred to as the target variable, was modelled as a function of various city-specific weather features such as 'pressure', 'wind speed', 'humidity', etc.

This project was also a Kaggle competition hosted by Explore Data Science Academy. Submissions to Kaggle were made on the pedictions obtained from the test data.

# Models
* Different models were tried on both train and test dataset to ensure that the best model is selected for the final prediction analysis. 
* The model selection was based on RMSE values for both the train and test data. 
* The best perfoming models were the XGBooost model and Gradient Boost model as they had the lowest RMSE scores in both the train data and test data sets.
* RMSE is the standard deviation of the prediction errors a lower RMSE in a model means better accuracy and better predictive power on unseen data.
* Ridge and Lasso shrinkage methods were used to aid in determining the predictors that can be dropped to reduce the noise in the data. 
* Gradient Boost, Random Forest and XGBoost were selected because of the robust and high performance associated with ensemble methods. 
* The results obtained from the different models confirms that ensemble methods using decision trees are the most accurate compared to all the models tested on the train and test datasets. 

# Attached files
Within the resources folder is the Jupyter Notebook used while interacting with the data sets and model building, also available are the Train and Test data sets that were used in model building and also making predictions on the target variable to be submitted on Kaggle.  
